<a href="http://darwineco.com/builders/" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Robert Klein</a> says…
>	This is kind of a Lakoff idea, but what do you think about the idea that the reason for these distortions has to do with the core thermometer metaphor at work in the overall notion of a bar graph? I guess there's no solid factual basis for my assumption there, but let's just kick it around. A thermometer is a static measurement of one dimension such that up=more. This is unconscious and therefore hard to shake. Maybe the cartesian-ness of it is inherently traditional and the axes must be presented in some way as to signal that they are 
>	not your grandpa's axes" if you are to use unconventional shapes and embellishments. Meanwhile, we just rolled out an API that correlates themes in unstructured info streams and returns them in a JSON format. Love to see what it opens up for you: http://darwineco.com/builders. Hit the engineers up on github if you have any questions or if things aren't working right. Glad I found your blog! Take care. Robert

<a href="http://www.storytellingwithdata.com" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Cole Nussbaumer</a> says…
>	Hi Robert, Super interesting research! Question on the zero-baseline piece: can you really draw the conclusion that non-zero baselines in bar charts aren't an issue? The example you show has a clear horizontal axis at zero, so the part below the axis wouldn't impact the relative values in the positive quadrant, right? Your conclusion seems like a big jump given what you've described and shown, but I'm wondering if there's more behind it in your research and paper. I always teach that bar charts must have a zero baseline to make an accurate visual comparison. I'd love to discuss this with you more if you're research is suggesting that might not be the case.

<a href="/about" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Robert Kosara</a> says…
>	Thanks, Cole! Drew got the same question after his presentation at EuroVis. We had to pick one style of extended bars to keep the number of cases manageable, and we often see some indication of where the zero line is, and also zero lines. But the result is of course contingent on that, if there was no line or if the bars did not differ below the zero line, that might well be different.
>	
>	This also doesn't say anything about cropped axes, which are more common in business presentations. The paper by Pandey, Bertini and others I link to at the very end of the posting looked into those, and they found cropped axes to be confusing and misleading.
