<a href="http://gravatar.com/nimh2" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">nimh</a> says…
>	As an amateur blogger who likes visualizations, I used Many Eyes a few times in the past, and always thought the results were beautiful and effective, if slow to load. I went back yesterday and today, though, and ran into a problem which, who knows, might explain your observation about the number of data sheets per visualization increasing. (I actually ran into this blog post when googling for solutions/explanations, though your whole blog looks interesting and I'll stick around to read a few more!)
>	
>	I uploaded a data set and wanted to create a map/visualization of it, but ran into trouble with Java, but the map won't materialize because Java is blocking the applet: a pop-up "Application Blocked by Security Settings" warning notes that "your security settings have blocked an untrusted application from running". The visualization is then replaced with an "Error. Click for details" message which, when clicked, again shows an "application blocked/untrusted application" warning, which actually seems one of Java's (red) more serious warnings. I recently updated Java and my security settings are simply the default ones, so I imagine others might run into this too..
>	
>	I tried loading one of my older visualizations and ran into the same problem. I could of course add the site to Java's whitelist, but if any visitors to my blog can't see the visualization either, for the same problem, what would be the point?
>	
>	Creating a geomap visualization within a Google Drive/Spreadsheet (which you can then embed as either interactive or plain image) seems like a promising alternative, though it appears to be a bit wonky still at times and there are hardly any customization options. In the past I used OpenHeatMap as a really low-threshold quick web tool to create an embeddable map, but it's a very plain tool, only for maps, and I think is just kept up as a legacy project by the creator as a favour. Infogr.am doesn't do maps, I think. So I'm always looking for alternative online visualization tools that are.easy to use for a non-programming amateur.
