<a href="http://www.visualisingdata.com/" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Andrew Kirk</a> says…
>	I can't say I'd agree that the observation you make that the visualisation resources list on my site has lost utility. Perhaps for people already established in the field it is of less value but my target audience is largely beginners/new entrants to this subject rather than, necessarily, academic/research audiences. It is admittedly hard work keeping it up-to-date (most recently I did some pruning two weeks ago after 12 months without the capacity) reflecting the evolving landscape of this field. However, that is what it aims to provide - a collection of most of the current visualisation or visualisation-related technology options out there based, roughly, on a classification of the general raison d'etre of each tool. All I can say is that feedback from visitors - and visitor numbers - suggests this is a quite useful catalogue from which they can explore new options to expand their capabilities. Curating this content further with more nuanced commentary about the relative strengths/features in each case is an entirely different proposition that I could never wish to undertake.

<a href="/about" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Robert Kosara</a> says…
>	I knew you'd take issue with this ;) What I meant was that a long list of options without any guidance just leads me to decision fatigue. It can definitely be helpful when I'm looking to research something in depth and want to see what all the options there are. But I also appreciate a clear recommendation that says: if you want to do A, first try this, if you're after B, try that! If that doesn't end up working out, I can always go back to the long list and spend more time digging through all the options myself.

<a href="http://twitter.com/alangwilson" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Alan Wilson (@alangwilson)</a> says…
>	I love the idea of a paper explainer. As a non-academic (graphic designer by trade) in the field of data visualization, it's possible—but painfully difficult to read most papers. I applaud any effort to make academic research more accessible to the masses.
>	
>	A pleasant side-effect might even be the reduction of absurd and misleading headlines we see in the media when they decide to report on something before understanding it.
