<a href="https://gicentre.net/jwo" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Jo Wood</a> says…
>	It seems like a healthy growth of the discipline that we are considering not just the design principles governing chart creation, but also the contexts in which they may be used. How easy that is in practice and whether we can guard against misuse in our designs are open questions. And of course these issues are not limited to charts, and include any form of communication. The discussion brings to mind a parallel one in identifying "fake news". Much of the focus is on whether some piece of information is "true" or "fake", but in many cases, it is the context, selective agenda setting and rhetorical narrative that are dominant issues.
>	
>	I would suggest though that there is a difference between your two examples. The problems with the first example are entirely extrinsic and arguably the chart designer would have little influence over its misuse. In the second example, there is an intrinsic problem with the design (zero origin for interval data). I'd suggest that design, which encourages us to judge distance from a meaningless baseline, interferes with our ability to make sense of the data (which is a separate matter to whether the scaling 'flattens' change over time). I'd put it into the same class of "bad" representation decimal numbers shown with a much higher precision than their accuracy, or 3d bar charts or rainbow colour maps etc. Those are choices that are definitely the responsibility of the chart designer.

<a href="http://testingforauc.wordpress.com" rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank">Mohamed Elsherif</a> says…
>	Thanks Robert! I will make sure to share this with my team.
